JUDY WOODRUFF: This week,
we begin our weeklong series
Inside Putin's Russia.
With support from the
Pulitzer Center on
Crisis Reporting, special
correspondent Nick Schifrin
and producer Zach Fannin
traveled to more than a dozen
cities, conducted 40 interviews,
and were arrested twice.
They will report later
on Russian propaganda,
Russia's opposition,
Russians who join ISIS,
and the tense
relationship with the U.S.
But the first story explores
a new Russian identity.
It's a combination of religion,
old Russian traditions, and
rediscovered patriotism.
This new identity helps explain
how people in today's Russia
think, how President Putin
acts, and why he
remains popular.
We begin in the southern
city of Krasnodar.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It is
Sunday morning in Russia's
conservative south.
More than 70 percent of
Russians are Orthodox Christian.
And under President
Vladimir Putin, the church
has been revitalized.
Archpriest Ivan Garmash
is known as Father John.
He tells parishioners
there's only one way
to be a true Christian.
And he says being a true
Christian is the only
way to be a true Russian.
FATHER JOHN, Archpriest
(through translator): The
state and my faith are united.
They can't be separated.
The values of the church
and the state coincide.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In Russia,
faith is patriotic.
The Orthodox Church criticizes
liberal Western values as
heresies, while Orthodox priests
bless Russian weapons
and endorse Putin
politically and personally.
The president's faith
increases his popularity.
FATHER JOHN (through
translator): He is a
religious man, and he
takes part in the divine
worship with the
people in churches.
What the president is doing,
what the government is doing, of
course, we support it, because
he acts conscientiously
and truthfully.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Today's
reenergized Orthodox
Church helps create pride
in a shared religion.
And historic Russian symbols,
like Cossacks, help create
pride in shared traditions; 500
years ago, Cossacks became
the Russian tsars' henchmen.
They were famous and feared
and helped police the
Russian empire's borders.
The Soviets persecuted them.
Today's Russia restores them.
Cossacks fills Krasnodar's
streets at an annual parade.
They believe Russia should
be governed by tradition,
rather than the rule of law.
VLADIMIR GROMOV, Former Army
Leader (through translator):
Only the nation that has kept
its traditions and
honors them more than
the law deserves respect.
The strength of a nation
is in its traditions.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For 17
years, Vladimir Gromov led
the regional Cossack army.
He revitalized this
event, and helped get the
Cossacks state sponsorship.
President Putin awarded him
the Order of Friendship Medal.
Gromov considers Putin the
custodian of Russian pride and
stability, preventing the chaos
of the 1990s.
VLADIMIR GROMOV (through
translator): If it
wasn't for President
Putin, Russia as a state
would be struggling through the
toughest times now, and possibly
may have ceased to exist.
Only Putin has saved the
state from total collapse.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And, in
return, Cossacks do what
they feel saves Putin.
WOMAN (singing): Putin
will teach you to
love the motherland.
NICK SCHIFRIN: During the 2014
Olympics, the band Pussy Riot
performed a song that disparages
Putin.
Cossacks unleashed their
centuries-old tradition
of vigilante violence.
Last year, Cossacks doused the
main opposition leader, Alexei
Navalny, and attacked his staff.
And in Kaliningrad, when a
small group of demonstrators
demanded the government change
its foreign policy, a
Cossack beat up 63-year-old
protester Yevgeniy Greishen.
He lost 80 percent
of his eyesight.
YEVGENIY GREISHEN, Protester
(through translator):
If the regime can't
suppress civil protest
through legal means,
they punish the people
through affiliated
associations, like the
Cossacks.
The regime acts through them.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Why
have the authorities
cracked down so much?
YEVGENIY GREISHEN
(through translator): In
Russia, statehood comes
first, and human rights
come last.
They use any means to prove the
state is the most important,
more important than a human.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The idea that
the state is more important
than the people is actually
not new.
Russians have long had
a collective identity.
ALEXANDER DUGIN, Russia: For us,
the man is collective concept.
We consider ourselves to
be the part of the whole.
So, to be Russian means
to share the same cultural
and historic identity.
NICK SCHIFRIN: For years,
TV fixture and firebrand
Alexander Dugin inspired
the Kremlin's ideology.
He says Russia's collective
identity comes from patriotism,
projection of power, and
respect for the ruler.
Putin's tapped into all three,
connecting today's Russia
to its imperial grandeur.
ALEXANDER DUGIN:
Patriotism is organic.
It is not artificial.
Empire, or state, is
not something additional
or artificial, because
it is our breath, our
skin, our organic way of life.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Today's
Kremlin uses that patriotism
to try and unite the
population and convince
them only a powerful state
can protect them from enemies.
Enemy number one?
The U.S.
ALEXANDER DUGIN: America is
on the brink of a revolution.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Dugin and the
Kremlin accuse the U.S. of
humiliating Russia by expanding
NATO to Russia's borders and
supporting revolutions in former
Soviet states and satellites.
Dugin advocates fighting
back by attacking the
West with asymmetric war.
You talk about introducing
geopolitical disorder,
actively supporting dissident
movements, extremism,
racist, sectarian groups.
This seems much
more than just...
ALEXANDER DUGIN: It's
exactly as you do.
It's exactly what you do.
You are supporting
separatist group.
You're supporting any kind of
nationalism, including Russian
nationalism that is against
Putin.
My words are the mirror
what you are doing.
It is mirror, and you are
frightened so much because you
are doing the same thing against
us.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In Ukraine,
that philosophy was weaponized.
In Eastern Ukraine, Russia
aids local separatists
who fight against a
Ukrainian government that's
pro-Western.
And in 2014 in Crimea,
Russia helped install
separatist leaders who
rushed through a referendum
that led to Crimea's annexation.
The day of annexation,
Putin gave a speech
combining religion,
patriotism, and imperial
history.
He said the West had been
subjugating Russia, and Russia
was finally demanding respect.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
If you compress the spring all
the way to its limit,
it will snap back hard.
Russia is an independent,
active participant in
international affairs.
Like other countries, it has
its own national interests that
need to be taken into account
and respected.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It's impossible
to overstate how transformative
Eastern Ukraine and here,
Crimea, have been to
recent Russian memory.
After the Crimea annexation,
Putin's popularity spiked
to nearly 90 percent.
Russians told pollsters
that suddenly they felt
like a superpower again.
And Russians all over
the country mobilized.
That's Denis Solomin in 2014
fighting in Eastern Ukraine.
He's a former soldier who
was working a mid-management
retail job when he quit
and crossed the border.
DENIS SOLOMIN, Retired
Soldier (through translator):
Now we hear that behind us.
There's an intense battle.
Mortars and shells are
raining in our direction.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Solomin
went to war because of that
collective Russian identity.
He believed the Ukrainian
government was attacking
ethnic Russians.
DENIS SOLOMIN (through
translator): Those
people who were under
fire, I identified them
as Russian people who need
protection by those who
can at least hold a weapon.
NICK SCHIFRIN: What was
it about them that you
felt, I need to help them?
DENIS SOLOMIN (through
translator): Those are
the people with the
same culture as mine,
the same language,
the same world view.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He was convinced
of that by propaganda.
In May 2014, dozens of
pro-Russian separatists
died in Odessa, Ukraine.
DENIS SOLOMIN (through
translator): It probably
became the pivotal moment.
There was a lot of information
about how people were simply
getting beaten and killed.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Russian
media exaggerated the
attack, even using an
actress to play a victim.
We know she was an actress
because she appeared in
unrelated pro-Russian
stories as three
entirely different people.
And that disinformation campaign
convinces the Kremlin's critics
the new Russian identity
is manufactured and a product
of deception and repression.
Sometimes, that repression
shows up in masks,
guns and camouflage.
Those are special forces
surrounding 66-year-old Ilmi
Umerov, in the jacket and jeans.
Umerov is a leader of
the Tatars, a Muslim
minority in Crimea.
He and other Tatars fight
the Russian annexation.
In response, many Tatars have
been jailed on questionable
charges, and Umerov was thrown
into a local insane asylum.
ILMI UMEROV, Tatar Leader
(through translator):
So, all this together,
we call one big act
of intimidation.
The purpose is to silence some,
and keep others ignorant to
turn them into zombies so they
think the same thing.
These are the necessary
conditions in order for
the people to be loyal
to their government.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But do you
acknowledge that that is the
majority of the population who
feels that way?
ILMI UMEROV (through
translator): Of course.
Of course.
We can't say that this
is a stupid population
or stupid people.
They are just living in
a constellation of fear.
And the propaganda machine rolls
over them like a steamroller.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Umerov may
accuse Putin of manipulating
the population, but under Putin,
Russia has revitalized
the majority religion,
brought back historic
traditions, and projects
power.
So, until there's an
alternative, he's considered
the creator and will
remain the caretaker
of the new Russian identity.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Nick
Schifrin in Krasnodar, Russia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we continue
our series Inside Putin's
Russia tomorrow, examining
the use of propaganda
by the state.
And you can hear more from
special correspondent Nick
Schifrin on our Facebook page
at Facebook.com/NewsHour.